Refactor java SDK and configuration (#4966)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/java/configuration.md

---
title: Configure the SDK
linkTitle: Configure the SDK
weight: 12
aliases: [config]
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: authservice blrp Dotel ignore LOWMEMORY myservice ottrace PKCS retryable tracepropagators autoconfigured Customizer
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable blanks-around-fences -->
<?code-excerpt path-base="examples/java/configuration"?>

The [SDK](/docs/languages/java/sdk/) is the built-in reference implementation of
the [API](/docs/languages/java/instrumentation/), processing and exporting
telemetry produced by instrumentation API calls. Configuring the SDK to process
and export appropriately is an essential step to integrating OpenTelemetry into
an application.

All SDK components have
[programmatic configuration APIs](#programmatic-configuration). This is the most
flexible, expressive way to configure the SDK. However, changing configuration
requires adjusting code and recompiling the application, and there is no
language interoperability since the API is written in java.

> The [zero-code SDK autoconfigure](#zero-code-sdk-autoconfigure) module offers a
> compelling alternative, configuring SDK components based off system properties /
> environment variables, with various extension points for instances where the
> properties are insufficient. **We recommend the zero-code SDK autoconfigure
> module.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [zero-code SDK autoconfigure](#zero-code-sdk-autoconfigure) module 
configures SDK components through system properties or environment
variables, with various extension points for instances where the properties
are insufficient.
```

Consider moving the recommendation to a callout in imperative tense that explains why using zero-code is a better choice.

> The [Java agent](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) automatically configures the SDK
> using the zero-code SDK autoconfigure module, and uses it in the
> instrumentation it installs. All autoconfigure content is applicable to Java
> Agent users.

## Programmatic configuration

The programmatic configuration interface is the set of APIs for constructing
[SDK](/docs/languages/java/sdk/) components. All SDK components have a
programmatic configuration API, and all other configuration mechanisms are built
on top of this API. For example, the
[autoconfigure environment variable and system property](#environment-variables-and-system-properties)
configuration interface interprets well-known environment variables and system
properties into a series of calls to the programmatic configuration API.

While other configuration mechanisms offer more convenience, none offer the
flexibility of writing code expressing the precise configuration required. When
a particular capability isn't supported by a higher order configuration

> mechanism, you may have no choice but to use programmatic configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanism, you might have no choice but to use programmatic configuration.
```

https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#may

The [SDK components](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#sdk-components) sections
demonstrate simple programmatic configuration API for key user-facing areas of

> the SDK. For an exhaustive set of the available configuration APIs, consult the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the SDK. For a list of the available configuration APIs, see the source
```

Author: Went with something slightly different but in the spirit of this suggestion.

code.

> ## Zero-code SDK autoconfigure

Author: I'm trying to rebrand file configuration as "declarative configuration" here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4128

Since SDK autoconfigure combines environment variable / system property configuration AND declarative configuration in one module, calling it "declarative configuration" is probably not a great name.

Maybe just "SDK autoconfigure"? Also open to other ideas..

The autoconfigure module (artifact
`io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure:{{% param vers.otel %}}`)
is a configuration interface built on top of the
[programmatic configuration interface](#programmatic-configuration), which
configures [SDK components](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#sdk-components) with zero
code. There are two distinct autoconfigure workflows:

- [Environment variables and system properties](#environment-variables-and-system-properties)
  interprets environment variables and system properties to create SDK
  components, including various customization points for overlaying programmatic
  configuration.

> - [Declarative configuration](#declarative-configuration) (**currently under

Author: Let's discuss up in this [comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/4966#discussion_r1705672165).

  development**) interprets a configuration model to create SDK components,
  which is typically encoded in a YAML configuration file.

Automatically configure SDK components using with autoconfigure as follows:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/AutoConfiguredSdk.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.autoconfigure.AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk;

public class AutoConfiguredSdk {
  public static OpenTelemetrySdk autoconfiguredSdk() {
    return AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk.initialize().getOpenTelemetrySdk();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> **NOTE:** The [Java agent](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) automatically configures

Reviewer: Best to use the callout notation. See, for example, https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/2bda479b6ce77f51266845ade9fe1b431dfde0d3/content/en/docs/concepts/signals/traces.md?plain=1#L15-L21

> **NOTE:** The [Java agent](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) automatically configures

Author: @theletterf do you have any issue with back-to-back alert blocks?

the SDK using this workflow, and uses it in the instrumentation it installs. All
autoconfigure content is applicable to Java agent users.

{{% alert color="info" %}} The autoconfigure module registers Java shutdown
hooks to shut down the SDK when appropriate. Because OpenTelemetry Java
[uses `java.util.logging` for internal logging](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#internal-logging),

> some of that logging may be suppressed during shutdown hooks. This is a bug in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some of that logging might be suppressed during shutdown hooks. This is a bug in
```

the JDK itself, and not something under the control of OpenTelemetry Java. If
you require logging during shutdown hooks, consider using `System.out` rather
than a logging framework that might shut itself down in a shutdown hook, thus
suppressing your log messages. See
this[JDK bug](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8161253) for more
details. {{% /alert %}}

### Environment variables and system properties

> Generally, autoconfigure supports properties listed in the
> [environment variable configuration specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/configuration/sdk-environment-variables.md#opentelemetry-environment-variable-specification),
> with occasional experimental and Java-specific additions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The autoconfigure module supports properties listed in the
[environment variable configuration specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/configuration/sdk-environment-variables.md#opentelemetry-environment-variable-specification),
with experimental and Java-specific additions.
```

> **NOTE:** The properties are listed below as system properties, but can also be
> set via environment variables. Apply the following steps to convert a system
> property to an environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** The following properties are listed as system properties, but can also be
set using environment variables. Apply the following steps to convert a system
property to an environment variable:
```

Ditto on using the callout notation macro.

Author: I'm just going to remove the `**NOTE:**` and not replace with a callout. There's so much content in this that the callout starts to be an eyesore.

- Convert the name to uppercase.
- Replace all `.` and `-` characters with `_`.

For example, the `otel.sdk.enabled` system property is equivalent to the
`OTEL_SDK_ENABLED` environment variable.

If a property is defined as both a system property and environment variable, the
system property takes priority.

#### Properties: general

Properties for disabling the [SDK](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#opentelemetrysdk):

| System property     | Description                                       | Default |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ------- |
| `otel.sdk.disabled` | If `true`, disable the OpenTelemetry SDK. **[1]** | `false` |

> **[1]**: If disabled, `AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk#getOpenTelemetrySdk()`
> will return a minimally configured instance (i.e.
> `OpenTelemetrySdk.builder().build()`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[1]**: If disabled, `AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk#getOpenTelemetrySdk()`
returns a minimally configured instance (for example, 
`OpenTelemetrySdk.builder().build()`).
```

Properties for configuring [resource](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#resource):

| System property                            | Description                                                                                                                             | Default                |
| ------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `otel.service.name`                        | Specify logical service name. Takes precedence over `service.name` defined with `otel.resource.attributes`.                             | `unknown_service:java` |
| `otel.resource.attributes`                 | Specify resource attributes in the following format: `key1=val1,key2=val2,key3=val3`.                                                   |                        |
| `otel.experimental.resource.disabled-keys` | Specify resource attribute keys that are filtered. This option is experimental and subject to change or removal.                        |                        |

> | `otel.java.enabled.resource.providers`     | Comma separated list of `ResourceProvider` fully qualified class names to enable. **[1]** If unset, all resource providers are enabled. |                        |
> | `otel.java.disabled.resource.providers`    | Comma separated list of `ResourceProvider` fully qualified class names to disable. **[1]**                                              |                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `otel.java.enabled.resource.providers`     | Comma-separated list of `ResourceProvider` fully qualified class names to enable. **[1]** If unset, all resource providers are enabled. |                        |
| `otel.java.disabled.resource.providers`    | Comma-separated list of `ResourceProvider` fully qualified class names to disable. **[1]**                                              |                        |
```

| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| `otel.attribute.value.length.limit` | The maximum length of attribute values. Applies to spans and logs. Overridden by `otel.span.attribute.value.length.limit`, `otel.span.attribute.count.limit`. | No limit |
| `otel.attribute.count.limit`        | The maximum number of attributes. Applies to spans, span events, span links, and logs.                                                                        | `128`    |

Properties for
[context propagation](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#textmappropagator):

| System property    | Description                                                                                                                        | Default                      |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |

> | `otel.propagators` | Comma separated list of propagators. Known values include `tracecontext`, `baggage`, `b3`, `b3multi`, `jaeger`, `ottrace`. **[1]** | `tracecontext,baggage` (W3C) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `otel.propagators` | Comma-separated list of propagators. Known values include `tracecontext`, `baggage`, `b3`, `b3multi`, `jaeger`, `ottrace`. **[1]** | `tracecontext,baggage` (W3C) |
```

| `otel.blrp.schedule.delay`        | The interval, in milliseconds, between two consecutive exports. | `1000`  |
| `otel.blrp.max.queue.size`        | The maximum queue size.                                         | `2048`  |
| `otel.blrp.max.export.batch.size` | The maximum batch size.                                         | `512`   |
| `otel.blrp.export.timeout`        | The maximum allowed time, in milliseconds, to export data.      | `30000` |

#### Properties: exporters

Properties for setting exporters:

| System property                               | Purpose                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Default          |
| --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------- |

> | `otel.traces.exporter`                        | Comma separated list of span exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `zipkin`, `console`, `logging-otlp`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                            | `otlp`           |
> | `otel.metrics.exporter`                       | Comma separated list of metric exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `prometheus`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                                                 | `otlp`           |
> | `otel.logs.exporter`                          | Comma separated list of log record exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `console`, `logging-otlp`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                                | `otlp`           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `otel.traces.exporter`                        | Comma-separated list of span exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `zipkin`, `console`, `logging-otlp`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                            | `otlp`           |
| `otel.metrics.exporter`                       | Comma-separated list of metric exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `prometheus`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                                                 | `otlp`           |
| `otel.logs.exporter`                          | Comma-separated list of log record exporters. Known values include `otlp`, `console`, `logging-otlp`, `none`. **[1]**                                                                                                                | `otlp`           |
```

public class AutoConfiguredSdk {
  public static OpenTelemetrySdk autoconfiguredSdk() {
    return AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk.initialize().getOpenTelemetrySdk();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

{{% alert %}} The [Java agent](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) and
[Spring starter](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/) automatically
configure the SDK using the zero-code SDK autoconfigure module, and install
instrumentation with it. All autoconfigure content is applicable to Java agent
and Spring starter users. {{% /alert %}}

{{% alert color="info" %}} The autoconfigure module registers Java shutdown
hooks to shut down the SDK when appropriate. Because OpenTelemetry Java
[uses `java.util.logging` for internal logging](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#internal-logging),
some of that logging might be suppressed during shutdown hooks. This is a bug in
the JDK itself, and not something under the control of OpenTelemetry Java. If
you require logging during shutdown hooks, consider using `System.out` rather
than a logging framework that might shut itself down in a shutdown hook, thus
suppressing your log messages. See

> this[JDK bug](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8161253) for more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this [JDK bug](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8161253) for more
```

  development**) interprets a configuration model to create SDK components,
  which is typically encoded in a YAML configuration file.

Automatically configure SDK components using with autoconfigure as follows:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<?code-excerpt "src/main/java/otel/AutoConfiguredSdk.java"?>
```java
package otel;

import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.autoconfigure.AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk;

public class AutoConfiguredSdk {
  public static OpenTelemetrySdk autoconfiguredSdk() {
    return AutoConfiguredOpenTelemetrySdk.initialize().getOpenTelemetrySdk();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

{{% alert %}} The [Java agent](/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) and
[Spring starter](/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/) automatically
configure the SDK using the zero-code SDK autoconfigure module, and install
instrumentation with it. All autoconfigure content is applicable to Java agent
and Spring starter users. {{% /alert %}}

{{% alert color="info" %}} The autoconfigure module registers Java shutdown
hooks to shut down the SDK when appropriate. Because OpenTelemetry Java

> [uses `java.util.logging` for internal logging](../sdk/#internal-logging), some
> of some logging might be suppressed during shutdown hooks. This is a bug in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[uses `java.util.logging` for internal logging](../sdk/#internal-logging),
some logging might be suppressed during shutdown hooks. This is a bug in the
```

---
title: Configure the SDK

> linkTitle: Configure the SDK

Reviewer 3: A `linkTitle` is meant to be short. How about:

```suggestion
linkTitle: SDK config
```

Reviewer 4: Based on https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/discussions/5039 we agreed to support long titles up to ~50 characters to improve user readabilite, so we can go with "Configure the SDK"

Author: Marking as resolved.

| `otel.{signal}.exporter=otlp`                              | Select the OpenTelemetry exporter for {signal}.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                            |

> | `otel.exporter.otlp.protocol`                              | The transport protocol to use on OTLP trace, metric, and log requests. Options include `grpc` and `http/protobuf`.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | `grpc` **[1]**                                                                                                             |

Reviewer 2: Now that 2.x has been out for a bit, would it make sense for us to switch these around and update the documented default as `http/protobuf` and then update the footnote to indicate that 1.x defaults to `grpc`?

Author: I don't think we can do that. This page is primarily documenting the `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure` module, which doesn't have a 2.0. The 2.0 override is specific to the javaagent.

        // Optionally customize ConfigProperties.
        .addPropertiesCustomizer(configProperties -> Collections.emptyMap())
        // Optionally customize SdkTracerProviderBuilder.
        .addTracerProviderCustomizer((builder, configProperties) -> builder)
        // Optionally customize SdkMeterProviderBuilder.
        .addMeterProviderCustomizer((builder, configProperties) -> builder)
        // Optionally customize MetricExporter.
        .addMetricExporterCustomizer((metricExporter, configProperties) -> metricExporter)
        // Optionally customize MetricReader.
        .addMetricReaderCustomizer((metricReader, configProperties) -> metricReader)
        // Optionally customize SdkLoggerProviderBuilder.
        .addLoggerProviderCustomizer((builder, configProperties) -> builder)
        // Optionally customize LogRecordExporter.
        .addLogRecordExporterCustomizer((logRecordExporter, configProperties) -> logRecordExporter)
        // Optionally customize LogRecordProcessor.
        .addLogRecordProcessorCustomizer((processor, configProperties) -> processor)
        .build()
        .getOpenTelemetrySdk();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> #### SPI (Service provider interface)

Reviewer 5: link to how this can be done with agent and starter:

https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/extensions/
https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/spring-boot-starter/sdk-configuration/#programmatic-configuration

Author: Adding a link up in the "Programmatic customization" section, which is a better conceptual match.

[SPIs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/sound/SPI-intro.html) (artifact

> `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-api:{{% param vers.otel %}}`)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-spi:{{% param vers.otel %}}`)
```

        .addLogRecordExporterCustomizer((logRecordExporter, configProperties) -> logRecordExporter)
        // Optionally customize LogRecordProcessor.
        .addLogRecordProcessorCustomizer((processor, configProperties) -> processor)
        .build()
        .getOpenTelemetrySdk();
  }
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

#### SPI (Service provider interface)

[SPIs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/sound/SPI-intro.html) (artifact
`io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-spi:{{% param vers.otel %}}`)
extend SDK autoconfiguration beyond the components built-in to the SDK.

The following sections describe the available SPIs. Each SPI section includes:

- A brief description, including link to javadoc type reference.
- A table of available built-in and `opentelemetry-java-contrib`
  implementations.
- A simple demonstration of a custom implementation.

##### ResourceProvider

[ResourceProvider](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-sdk-extension-autoconfigure-spi/latest/io/opentelemetry/sdk/autoconfigure/spi/ResourceProvider.html)s
contribute to the autoconfigured [resource](/docs/languages/java/sdk/#resource).

> `ResourceProvider`s built-in to the SDK and maintained by community in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ResourceProvider`s that are built-in to the SDK and maintained by the community in
```
